---
layout: posts
title:  "Musings on Statistics"
date:   2018-10-09 00:00:00 +0100
categories: stats
entries_layout: grid
---

## The Need for Stats & What It Is

The way I see it, science has established some great methods to study data that isn't random (or has very little randomness in it). Then, there are those datasets which are so random that they have very little interesting structure. One here has to _control_ for the stuff that's changing so much in the background and identify the behavior of the system by isolating changes attributable to particular variables (perhaps by limiting them).

Then there's the gray area in the middle where there's structure in the data that can be understood by understanding, for each specific context, _what_ could give rise to the observed data in the light of uncertainty and how plausible this understanding is. Enter statistics.

Historically, the concept of _uncertainty_ has been around the notion of how frequently one observes an event of interest, but it has since expanded to account and quantify for a lot of other, more intuitive forms of unknowability, all of which perhaps could be explained _mechanistically_, i.e. considering the uncertainty of complex events as the aggregate of the usual uncertainties associated with the individual components that make up the event.

Another interesting thing about statistical reasoning is that a lot of ideas in the philosophy of science (e.g. falsification, "strength" of induction, not being able to study hypotheses individually, the inability to separate evidence from theory, simplicity of hypotheses, etc.) have corresponding statistical parallels. This is probably not a coincidence, but still, statistics has been derived from very few premises - it's interesting to me that one can derive these philosophical ideas from nothing but the principles of statistics.

(last updated 12 Nov 2018)