---
layout: posts
title:  "Measures & Defining Probability"
date:   2018-10-09 00:00:00 +0100
categories: stats
entries_layout: grid
---

## Probability & Sigma Algebras

Probability today is a (mathematically) well defined object, after a lot of struggle in the late 19th and early 20th century. Later, subjective forms of (precursors to Bayesian) probability came up with axioms that could result in the modern accepted definition. Due to Kolmogorov, this is roughly:

If \\(\Omega\\) be a set of events and \\(\Sigma\\) is a bunch of interesting questions we can ask about the events, then, \\(\mathcal P\\) is a function called a probability function that, for each interesting question outputs a number (which is usually interpret as a measure of plausibility).

\\(\mathcal P\\) obeys the following rules:
 1. \\(\mathcal P(interesting \; question)\\) is either 0 or more than 0.
 2. \\(\mathcal P(\Omega)\\) is 1 (so the probability that something - _anything_ - from \\(\Omega\\) happens is 1).
 3. If two events, \\(A,\; B\\), can't both happen, then \\(P(A\;or\;B\;happening) = P(A) + P(B)\\)

Notice that the set this probability function _acts on_ is the set of interesting questions. This set of interesting questions needs to be defined _**on**_ a set of events \\(\Omega\\) and _must_ obey these rules:
 1. Nothing happening (\\(\emptyset = \Omega^c\\)) and anything happening are both in the set of interesting questions. This is because you need the two things that will give you the least and highest probability, among many other reasons.
 2. If "event \\(A\\) happening" is in the set of interesting questions, then "event \\(A\\) not happening" should be as well. This is because you define \\(\mathcal P(A) = a\\), its complement needs to exist for us to define \\(\mathcal P(A^c) = 1 - a\\).
 3. If two events \\(A, B\\) are in the set of interesting questions, then we must be able to ask, what is the probability of A _or_ B happening - there is a need for consistency, see the third point in the probability definition. So, the union \\(A \cup B\\) must also be in the set of interesting questions.

This set of interesting questions is called a \\(\sigma\\)-algebra. The probability function can then be defined on the set of events and the interesting questions we can ask about them. The probability function doesn't know how to handle any question not defined in the set of interesting questions, so the probability of any undefined question is meaningless.

More formally, the probability function \\(\mathcal P\\) is a measure, and it is in measure theory that we find assurances to statements we often take for granted.

### Random Variables

For convenience, we usually work with functions called _**random variables**_ \\(X:\Omega \rightarrow \mathbb R \\) which are defined on a tuple - the set of events and the set of questions - called a measurable space. Sometimes, we replace \\(\mathbb R\\) with some other set and call the function a "random element" instead. We do this, in part, for convenience e.g. \\( \\{"head", "tail" \\} \rightarrow \\{ 0, 1 \\} \\).

Random variables are usually the basis for defining "probability/model laws", which are a set of statements about the assumptions in a model, and standard distributions can usually be used with the random variables as they're defined on the same space (the real line).

### Non-Measurable Spaces

Measurable spaces are a big deal because you'd run into major problems defining measures on non-measurable spaces. Famous (and _amazing_) examples include the [Vitali Set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitali_set) and the [Banach-Tarski Paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banach%E2%80%93Tarski_paradox). It's profoundly amazing that the construction of these sets always relies on the axiom of choice; most mathematicians are comfortable accepting the existence of sets which have no measure than abandoning the axiom of choice. Here's a [cool video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcRZadc5KpI) on that by PBS Infinite Series & Kelsey Houston-Edwards.

Mathematics itself is simply a model for representing reality.