---
layout: posts
title:  "A Discrete Time Stochastic SEIR Model"
date:   2020-04-13 00:00:15 +0100
categories: stats r
entries_layout: grid
---

This is an implementation of the discrete time epidemiological (SEIR) model based on:

> P. E. Lekone and B. F. Finkenstädt, "Statistical Inference in a Stochastic Epidemic SEIR Model with Control Intervention", 2006.

I've made some changes to it, e.g. below, an intervention does not lead to an exponential decay of exposure probabilities - rather, the intervention considered here (a 'lockdown') just leads to lower exposure probabilities.

<details open>
<summary> JAGS Code </summary>

{%highlight R%}

model {
    b_i ~ dexp(1)
    b_m ~ dunif(0, b_i)

    S[1] = N
    E[1] = E_0
    I[1] = 0
    R[1] = 0

    for(t in 1:(T - 1)) {

        S[t + 1] = S[t] - B[t]
        E[t + 1] = E[t] + B[t] - C[t]
        I[t + 1] = I[t] + C[t] - D[t]
        R[t + 1] = R[t] + D[t]

        B[t] ~ dbin(Pr[t], S[t])
        C[t] ~ dbin(1 - exp(-p), E[t])
        D[t] ~ dbin(1 - exp(-y), I[t])

        b[t] = ifelse(t <= T_l, b_m, b_i)
        Pr[t] = 1 - exp(-b[t] * I[t] / N)
    }
}

{% endhighlight %}

</details>

I tried to use the following probabilistic programming languages:
 * Stan: Didn't work because integer parameters are not supported. Marginalizing the parameters would be very expensive I think due to the number of paths. Treating the parameters as real and making normal approximations with truncation was a nightmare (as linear combinations of parameters themselves had to be positive and I ran into precision issues).
 * PyMC3: I'm a beginner with PyMC3 and my implementation was too inefficient. In the docs, the PyMC-devs suggest using theano scan instead of for-loops but I couldn't figure out how parameter declarations worked in the backend. Code is still shown below if you're interested.
 * Tensorflow probability: I'm not used to the API and couldn't find a Gibbs sampler.
 * JAGS: Implementation was very simple and sampling works like a charm. Code above.

<details closed>
<summary> PyMC3 Naive Implementation </summary>

{%highlight python%}

with pm.Model() as m:

    p_c = 1 - np.exp(-p)
    p_r = 1 - np.exp(-y)

    b_0 = pm.Exponential('b_0', lam = 1)
    b_1 = pm.Uniform('b_1', lower = 0, upper = b_0)

    S = [N, ]; E = [E_0, ]; I = [0, ]; R = [0, ]
    B = []; C = []; D = []; Pr = []

    for t in trange(T):
        b = b_0 if t < T_l else b_1
        t_now = str(t); t_next = str(t + 1)

        # this is inefficient
        Pr.append(pm.Deterministic('Pr_' + t_now, 1 - np.exp(-b * I[t] / N)))
        B.append(pm.Binomial('B_' + t_now, S[t], Pr[t]))
        C.append(pm.Binomial('C_' + t_now, E[t], p_c))
        D.append(pm.Binomial('D_' + t_now, I[t], p_r))

        S.append(pm.Deterministic('S_' + t_next, S[t] - B[t]))
        E.append(pm.Deterministic('E_' + t_next, E[t] + B[t] - C[t]))
        I.append(pm.Deterministic('I_' + t_next, I[t] + C[t] - D[t]))
        R.append(pm.Deterministic('R_' + t_next, R[t] + D[t]))

{% endhighlight %}

</details>
