---
layout: posts
title:  "Dead Code & Syntax Trees"
date:   2021-01-20 00:22:45 +0000
categories: R
entries_layout: grid
---

This post was motivated by some R code that I came across (over a thousand lines of it) with a bunch of if-statements that were never called. I wanted an automatic way to get a minimal reproducing example of a test from this file. While reading about how to do this, I came across [Dead Code Elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_code_elimination), which kills unused and unreachable code and variables as an example.

An R library exists for code optimization but it didn't address my issue of removing `if` statements by running through the code. So, to learn a bit about this, I made a naive attempt. It was more challenging and ugly that I thought it'd be.

My attempt was as follows - I break up the code into statements and check if a statement is an if statement, which has the following syntax: `if (condition) expression_true else expression_false`. I then evaluate the condition and replace the statement with the appropriate expression. Identifying how to play around with the syntax trees was challenging at first, but I noticed that `as.list(quote(...))` breaks up `...` into a list of expressions representing the syntax tree (noticed this in the `pryr` source!). This is obviously so much cleaner than regex but I still had to write a lot of special cases, e.g. handling `NULL`s, inline `if` statements, etc. I recursively split expressions, evaluate them and then recombine the lists into a call. Loops are ignored. A lot of work can still be done on this, but dunno if it's worth the time.

<details>
<summary> Demo: R Code </summary>

{% highlight R %}

contains_if <- function(ex_list) {
    if(length(ex_list) <= 1)
        return(FALSE)
    else if(ex_list[[1]] == quote(`if`))
        return(TRUE)
    else {
        return(any(sapply(as.list(ex_list), contains_if)))
    }
}

check_for_inline_if <- function(ex_list) {
    if(length(ex_list) == 3)
    if(ex_list[[1]] == quote(`<-`))
    if(length(as.list(ex_list[[3]])) >= 1)
    if(as.list(ex_list[[3]])[[1]] == quote(`if`))
        return(TRUE)
    return(FALSE)
}

fix_inline_if <- function(ex_list) {
    if_statement <- as.list(ex_list[[3]])
    my_list <- c(ex_list[1:2], if_statement[3:4])
    if_statement[[3]] <- as.call(my_list[c(1, 2, 3)])
    if_statement[[4]] <- as.call(my_list[c(1, 2, 4)])
    return(if_statement)
}

remove_unused_ifs <- function(expr) {
    ex_list <- as.list(expr)

    if(check_for_inline_if(ex_list)) {
        ex_list <- fix_inline_if(ex_list)
        expr <- as.call(ex_list)
    }

    if(length(expr) == 1) {
        return(expr)
    } else if(!contains_if(ex_list) |
              ex_list[[1]] == quote(`for`) | 
              ex_list[[1]] == quote(`while`)) {
        eval(expr, .GlobalEnv)
        return(expr)
    } else if(ex_list[[1]] == quote(`if`)) {
        condition <- ex_list[[2]]
        expr_true <- ex_list[[3]]
        expr_flse <- if(length(ex_list) == 4)
                     ex_list[[4]] else quote({})
        expr <- if(eval(condition, .GlobalEnv))
                expr_true else expr_flse
        return(remove_unused_ifs(expr))
    } else {
        return(lapply(ex_list, remove_unused_ifs))
    }
}

recombine <- function(ex_list) {
    if(is.list(ex_list)) {
        if(any(sapply(ex_list, is.list))) {
            return(recombine(lapply(ex_list, recombine)))
        } else {
            return(as.call(ex_list))
        }
    } else {
        return(ex_list)
    }
}

recombine(remove_unused_ifs(body(function() {
    my_list <- list(my_bool = F)

    abc <- if(TRUE) 1 else NULL
    print(abc)

    if(my_list$my_bool) {
        print('hello_a')
    } else {
        if(!my_list$my_bool) {
            if(TRUE) print('hello_b')
        } else print('bye')
    }
})))

# Output:
# {
#     my_list <- list(my_bool = F)
#     abc <- 1
#     print(abc)
#     {
#         {
#             print("hello_b")
#         }
#     }
# }

{% endhighlight %}

</details> <br>
